# Text 20

त्रैविद्या मां सोमपाः पूतपापा  
यज्ञैरिष्ट्वा स्वर्गतिं प्रार्थयन्ते ।  
ते पुण्यमासाद्य सुरेन्द्रलोक-  
मश्नन्ति दिव्यान्दिवि देवभोगान् ॥२०॥

trai-vidyā māḿ soma-pāḥ pūta-pāpā  
yajñair iṣṭvā svar-gatiḿ prārthayante  
te puṇyam āsādya surendra-lokam  
aśnanti divyān divi deva-bhogān



### Translation:

**Those who study the Vedas and drink the soma juice, seeking the heavenly planets, worship Me indirectly. Purified of sinful reactions, they take birth on the pious, heavenly planet of Indra, where they enjoy godly delights.**

### Purport:

The word trai-vidyah refers to the three Vedas -- Sama, Yajur and Rig. A brahmana who has studied these three Vedas is called a tri-vedi. Anyone who is very much attached to knowledge derived from these three Vedas is respected in society. Unfortunately, there are many great scholars of the Vedas who do not know the ultimate purport of studying them. Therefore Krishna herein declares Himself to be the ultimate goal for the tri-vedis. Actual tri-vedis take shelter under the lotus feet of Krishna and engage in pure devotional service to satisfy the Lord. Devotional service begins with the chanting of the Hare Krishna mantra and side by side trying to understand Krishna in truth. Unfortunately those who are simply official students of the Vedas become more interested in offering sacrifices to the different demigods like Indra and Candra. By such endeavor, the worshipers of different demigods are certainly purified of the contamination of the lower qualities of nature and are thereby elevated to the higher planetary systems or heavenly planets known as Maharloka, Janoloka, Tapoloka, etc. Once situated on those higher planetary systems, one can satisfy his senses hundreds of thousands of times better than on this planet.