# Text 26-27

सद्भावे साधुभावे च सदित्येतत्प्रयुज्यते ।  
प्रशस्ते कर्मणि तथा सच्छब्दः पार्थ युज्यते ॥२६॥  
यज्ञे तपसि दाने च स्थितिः सदिति चोच्यते ।  
कर्म चैव तदर्थीयं सदित्येवाभिधीयते ॥२७॥

sad-bhāve sādhu-bhāve ca  
sad ity etat prayujyate  
praśaste karmaṇi tathā  
sac-chabdaḥ pārtha yujyate  
yajñe tapasi dāne ca  
sthitiḥ sad iti cocyate  
karma caiva tad-arthīyaḿ  
sad ity evābhidhīyate



### Translation:

**The Absolute Truth is the objective of devotional sacrifice, and it is indicated by the word sat. The performer of such sacrifice is also called sat, as are all works of sacrifice, penance and charity which, true to the absolute nature, are performed to please the Supreme Person, O son of Pritha.**

### Purport:

The words prasaste karmani, or "prescribed duties," indicate that there are many activities prescribed in the Vedic literature which are purificatory processes, beginning from the time of conception up to the end of one's life. Such purificatory processes are adopted for the ultimate liberation of the living entity. In all such activities it is recommended that one vibrate om tat sat. The words sad-bhave and sadhu-bhave indicate the transcendental situation. Acting in Krishna consciousness is called sattva, and one who is fully conscious of the activities of Krishna consciousness is called a sadhu. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.25.25) it is said that the transcendental subject matter becomes clear in the association of the devotees. The words used are satam prasangat. Without good association, one cannot achieve transcendental knowledge. When initiating a person or offering the sacred thread, one vibrates the words om tat sat. Similarly, in all kinds of performance of yajna the object is the Supreme, om tat sat. The word tad-arthiyam further means offering service to anything which represents the Supreme, including such service as cooking and helping in the Lord's temple, or any other kind of work for broadcasting the glories of the Lord. These supreme words om tat sat are thus used in many ways to perfect all activities and make everything complete.