# Text 10

प्रयाणकाले मनसाचलेन  
भक्त्या युक्तो योगबलेन चैव ।  
भ्रुवोर्मध्ये प्राणमावेश्य सम्यक्  
स तं परं पुरुषमुपैति दिव्यम् ॥ १०॥

prayāṇa-kāle manasācalena  
bhaktyā yukto yoga-balena caiva  
bhruvor madhye prāṇam āveśya samyak  
sa taḿ paraḿ puruṣam upaiti divyam



### Translation:

**One who, at the time of death, fixes his life air between the eyebrows and, by the strength of yoga, with an undeviating mind, engages himself in remembering the Supreme Lord in full devotion, will certainly attain to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.**

### Purport:

In this verse it is clearly stated that at the time of death the mind must be fixed in devotion to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For those practiced in yoga, it is recommended that they raise the life force between the eyebrows (to the ajna-cakra). The practice of shat-cakra-yoga, involving meditation on the six cakras, is suggested here. A pure devotee does not practice such yoga, but because he is always engaged in Krishna consciousness, at death he can remember the Supreme Personality of Godhead by His grace. This is explained in verse fourteen.

The particular use of the word yoga-balena is significant in this verse because without practice of yoga -- whether shat-cakra-yoga or bhakti-yoga -- one cannot come to this transcendental state of being at the time of death. One cannot suddenly remember the Supreme Lord at death; one must have practiced some yoga system, especially the system of bhakti-yoga. Since one's mind at death is very disturbed, one should practice transcendence through yoga during one's life.