# Text 11

यदक्षरं वेदविदो वदन्ति  
विशन्ति यद्यतयो वीतरागाः ।  
यदिच्छन्तो ब्रह्मचर्यं चरन्ति  
तत्ते पदं संग्रहेण प्रवक्ष्ये ॥११॥

yad akṣaraḿ veda-vido vadanti  
viśanti yad yatayo vīta-rāgāḥ  
yad icchanto brahmacaryaḿ caranti  
tat te padaḿ sańgraheṇa pravakṣye



### Translation:

**Persons who are learned in the Vedas, who utter omkara and who are great sages in the renounced order enter into Brahman. Desiring such perfection, one practices celibacy. I shall now briefly explain to you this process by which one may attain salvation.**

### Purport:

Lord Sri Krishna has recommended to Arjuna the practice of shat-cakra-yoga, in which one places the air of life between the eyebrows. Taking it for granted that Arjuna might not know how to practice shat-cakra-yoga, the Lord explains the process in the following verses. The Lord says that Brahman, although one without a second, has various manifestations and features. Especially for the impersonalists, the akshara, or omkara -- the syllable om -- is identical with Brahman. Krishna here explains the impersonal Brahman, in which the renounced order of sages enter.

In the Vedic system of knowledge, students, from the very beginning, are taught to vibrate om and learn of the ultimate impersonal Brahman by living with the spiritual master in complete celibacy. In this way they realize two of Brahman's features. This practice is very essential for the student's advancement in spiritual life, but at the moment such brahmacari (unmarried celibate) life is not at all possible. The social construction of the world has changed so much that there is no possibility of one's practicing celibacy from the beginning of student life. Throughout the world there are many institutions for different departments of knowledge, but there is no recognized institution where students can be educated in the brahmacari principles. Unless one practices celibacy, advancement in spiritual life is very difficult. Therefore Lord Caitanya has announced, according to the scriptural injunctions for this Age of Kali, that in this age no process of realizing the Supreme is possible except the chanting of the holy names of Lord Krishna: Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.