# Text 11-12

चिन्तामपरिमेयां च प्रलयान्तामुपाश्रिताः ।  
कामोपभोगपरमा एतावदिति निश्चिताः ॥११॥  
आशापाशशतैर्बद्धाः कामक्रोधपरायणाः ।  
ईहन्ते कामभोगार्थमन्यायेनार्थसञ्चयान् ॥१२॥

cintām aparimeyāḿ ca  
pralayāntām upāśritāḥ  
kāmopabhoga-paramā  
etāvad iti niścitāḥ  
āśā-pāśa-śatair baddhāḥ  
kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥ  
īhante kāma-bhogārtham  
anyāyenārtha-sañcayān



### Translation:

**They believe that to gratify the senses is the prime necessity of human civilization. Thus until the end of life their anxiety is immeasurable. Bound by a network of hundreds of thousands of desires and absorbed in lust and anger, they secure money by illegal means for sense gratification.**

### Purport:

The demoniac accept that the enjoyment of the senses is the ultimate goal of life, and this concept they maintain until death. They do not believe in life after death, and they do not believe that one takes on different types of bodies according to one's karma, or activities in this world. Their plans for life are never finished, and they go on preparing plan after plan, all of which are never finished. We have personal experience of a person of such demoniac mentality who, even at the point of death, was requesting the physician to prolong his life for four years more because his plans were not yet complete. Such foolish people do not know that a physician cannot prolong life even for a moment. When the notice is there, there is no consideration of the man's desire. The laws of nature do not allow a second beyond what one is destined to enjoy.

The demoniac person, who has no faith in God or the Supersoul within himself, performs all kinds of sinful activities simply for sense gratification. He does not know that there is a witness sitting within his heart. The Supersoul is observing the activities of the individual soul. As it is stated in the Upanishads, there are two birds sitting in one tree; one is acting and enjoying or suffering the fruits of the branches, and the other is witnessing. But one who is demoniac has no knowledge of Vedic scripture, nor has he any faith; therefore he feels free to do anything for sense enjoyment, regardless of the consequences.