# Text 1

अर्जुन उवाच  
मदनुग्रहाय परमं गुह्यमध्यात्मसंज्ञितम् ।  
यत्त्वयोक्तं वचस्तेन मोहोऽयं विगतो मम ॥१॥

arjuna uvāca  
mad-anugrahāya paramaḿ  
guhyam adhyātma-saḿjñitam  
yat tvayoktaḿ vacas tena  
moho 'yaḿ vigato mama



### Translation:

**Arjuna said: By my hearing the instructions You have kindly given me about these most confidential spiritual subjects, my illusion has now been dispelled.**

### Purport:

This chapter reveals Krishna as the cause of all causes. He is even the cause of the Maha-Vishnu, from whom the material universes emanate. Krishna is not an incarnation; He is the source of all incarnations. That has been completely explained in the last chapter.

Now, as far as Arjuna is concerned, he says that his illusion is over. This means that Arjuna no longer thinks of Krishna as a mere human being, as a friend of his, but as the source of everything. Arjuna is very enlightened and is glad that he has such a great friend as Krishna, but now he is thinking that although he may accept Krishna as the source of everything, others may not. So in order to establish Krishna's divinity for all, he is requesting Krishna in this chapter to show His universal form. Actually when one sees the universal form of Krishna one becomes frightened, like Arjuna, but Krishna is so kind that after showing it He converts Himself again into His original form. Arjuna agrees to what Krishna has several times said: Krishna is speaking to him just for his benefit. So Arjuna acknowledges that all this is happening to him by Krishna's grace. He is now convinced that Krishna is the cause of all causes and is present in everyone's heart as the Supersoul.