# Text 32

श्रीभगवानुवाच  
कालोऽस्मि लोकक्षयकृत्प्रवृद्धो  
लोकान्समाहर्तुमिह प्रवृत्तः ।  
ऋतेऽपि त्वां न भविष्यन्ति सर्वे  
येऽवस्थिताः प्रत्यनीकेषु योधाः ॥३२॥

śrī-bhagavān uvāca  
kālo 'smi loka-kṣaya-kṛt pravṛddho  
lokān samāhartum iha pravṛttaḥ  
ṛte 'pi tvāḿ na bhaviṣyanti sarve  
ye 'vasthitāḥ pratyanīkeṣu yodhāḥ



### Translation:

**The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Time I am, the great destroyer of the worlds, and I have come here to destroy all people. With the exception of you [the Pandavas], all the soldiers here on both sides will be slain.**

### Purport:

Although Arjuna knew that Krishna was his friend and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he was puzzled by the various forms exhibited by Krishna. Therefore he asked further about the actual mission of this devastating force. It is written in the Vedas that the Supreme Truth destroys everything, even the brahmanas. As stated in the Katha Upanishad (1.2.25),

yasya brahma ca kshatram ca

ubhe bhavata odanah

mrityur yasyopasecanam

ka ittha veda yatra sah

Eventually all the brahmanas, kshatriyas and everyone else are devoured like a meal by the Supreme. This form of the Supreme Lord is the all-devouring giant, and here Krishna presents Himself in that form of all-devouring time. Except for a few Pandavas, everyone who was present on that battlefield would be devoured by Him. Arjuna was not in favor of the fight, and he thought it was better not to fight; then there would be no frustration. In reply, the Lord is saying that even if he did not fight, every one of them would be destroyed, for that was His plan. If Arjuna stopped fighting, they would die in another way. Death could not be checked, even if he did not fight. In fact, they were already dead. Time is destruction, and all manifestations are to be vanquished by the desire of the Supreme Lord. That is the law of nature.