# Text 36

अर्जुन उवाच  
स्थाने हृषीकेश तव प्रकीर्त्या  
जगत्प्रहृष्यत्यनुरज्यते च ।  
रक्षांसि भीतानि दिशो द्रवन्ति  
सर्वे नमस्यन्ति च सिद्धसंघाः ॥३६॥

arjuna uvāca  
sthāne hṛṣīkeśa tava prakīrtyā  
jagat prahṛṣyaty anurajyate ca  
rakṣāḿsi bhītāni diśo dravanti  
sarve namasyanti ca siddha-sańghāḥ



### Translation:

**Arjuna said: O master of the senses, the world becomes joyful upon hearing Your name, and thus everyone becomes attached to You. Although the perfected beings offer You their respectful homage, the demons are afraid, and they flee here and there. All this is rightly done.**

### Purport:

Arjuna, after hearing from Krishna about the outcome of the Battle of Kurukshetra, became enlightened, and as a great devotee and friend of the Supreme Personality of Godhead he said that everything done by Krishna is quite fit. Arjuna confirmed that Krishna is the maintainer and the object of worship for the devotees and the destroyer of the undesirables. His actions are equally good for all. Arjuna understood herein that when the Battle of Kurukshetra was being concluded, in outer space there were present many demigods, siddhas, and the intelligentsia of the higher planets, and they were observing the fight because Krishna was present there. When Arjuna saw the universal form of the Lord, the demigods took pleasure in it, but others, who were demons and atheists, could not stand it when the Lord was praised. Out of their natural fear of the devastating form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they fled. Krishna's treatment of the devotees and the atheists is praised by Arjuna. In all cases a devotee glorifies the Lord because he knows that whatever He does is good for all.