# Text 43

पितासि लोकस्य चराचरस्य  
त्वमस्य पूज्यश्च गुरुर्गरीयान् ।  
न त्वत्समोऽस्त्यभ्यधिकः कुतोऽन्यो  
लोकत्रयेऽप्यप्रतिमप्रभाव ॥४३॥

pitāsi lokasya carācarasya  
tvam asya pūjyaś ca gurur garīyān  
na tvat-samo 'sty abhyadhikaḥ kuto 'nyo  
loka-traye 'py apratima-prabhāva



### Translation:

**You are the father of this complete cosmic manifestation, of the moving and the nonmoving. You are its worshipable chief, the supreme spiritual master. No one is equal to You, nor can anyone be one with You. How then could there be anyone greater than You within the three worlds, O Lord of immeasurable power?**

### Purport:

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna, is worshipable as a father is worshipable for his son. He is the spiritual master because He originally gave the Vedic instructions to Brahma and presently He is also instructing Bhagavad-gita to Arjuna; therefore He is the original spiritual master, and any bona fide spiritual master at the present moment must be a descendant in the line of disciplic succession stemming from Krishna. Without being a representative of Krishna, one cannot become a teacher or spiritual master of transcendental subject matter.

The Lord is being paid obeisances in all respects. He is of immeasurable greatness. No one can be greater than the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna, because no one is equal to or higher than Krishna within any manifestation, spiritual or material. Everyone is below Him. No one can excel Him. This is stated in the Svetasvatara Upanishad (6.8):

na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate

na tat-samas cabhyadhikas ca drisyate

The Supreme Lord, Krishna, has senses and a body like the ordinary man, but for Him there is no difference between His senses, His body, His mind and Himself. Foolish persons who do not perfectly know Him say that Krishna is different from His soul, mind, heart and everything else. Krishna is absolute; therefore His activities and potencies are supreme. It is also stated that although He does not have senses like ours, He can perform all sensory activities; therefore His senses are neither imperfect nor limited. No one can be greater than Him, no one can be equal to Him, and everyone is lower than Him.

The knowledge, strength and activities of the Supreme Personality are all transcendental. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.9):

janma karma ca me divyam

evam yo vetti tattvatah

tyaktva deham punar janma

naiti mam eti so 'rjuna

Whoever knows Krishna's transcendental body, activities and perfection, after quitting his body, returns to Him and doesn't come back again to this miserable world. Therefore one should know that Krishna's activities are different from others. The best policy is to follow the principles of Krishna; that will make one perfect. It is also stated that there is no one who is master of Krishna; everyone is His servant. The Caitanya-caritamrita (Adi 5.142) confirms, ekale isvara krishna, ara saba bhritya: only Krishna is God, and everyone else is His servant. Everyone is complying with His order. There is no one who can deny His order. Everyone is acting according to His direction, being under His superintendence. As stated in the Brahma-samhita, He is the cause of all causes.