# Text 47

श्रीभगवानुवाच  
मया प्रसन्नेन तवार्जुनेदं  
रूपं परं दर्शितमात्मयोगात् ।  
तेजोमयं विश्वमनन्तमाद्यं  
यन्मे त्वदन्येन न दृष्टपूर्वम् ॥४७॥

śrī-bhagavān uvāca  
mayā prasannena tavārjunedaḿ  
rūpaḿ paraḿ darśitam ātma-yogāt  
tejo-mayaḿ viśvam anantam ādyaḿ  
yan me tvad anyena na dṛṣṭa-pūrvam



### Translation:

**The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, happily have I shown you, by My internal potency, this supreme universal form within the material world. No one before you has ever seen this primal form, unlimited and full of glaring effulgence.**

### Purport:

Arjuna wanted to see the universal form of the Supreme Lord, so Lord Krishna, out of His mercy upon His devotee Arjuna, showed His universal form, full of effulgence and opulence. This form was glaring like the sun, and its many faces were rapidly changing. Krishna showed this form just to satisfy the desire of His friend Arjuna. This form was manifested by Krishna through His internal potency, which is inconceivable by human speculation. No one had seen this universal form of the Lord before Arjuna, but because the form was shown to Arjuna, other devotees in the heavenly planets and in other planets in outer space could also see it. They had not seen it before, but because of Arjuna they were also able to see it. In other words, all the disciplic devotees of the Lord could see the universal form which was shown to Arjuna by the mercy of Krishna. Someone has commented that this form was shown to Duryodhana also when Krishna went to Duryodhana to negotiate for peace. Unfortunately, Duryodhana did not accept the peace offer, but at that time Krishna manifested some of His universal forms. But those forms are different from this one shown to Arjuna. It is clearly said that no one had ever seen this form before.