# Text 49

मा ते व्यथा मा च विमूढभावो  
दृष्ट्वा रूपं घोरमीदृङ्ममेदम् ।  
व्यपेतभीः प्रीतमनाः पुनस्त्वं  
तदेव मे रूपमिदं प्रपश्य ॥४९॥

mā te vyathā mā ca vimūḍha-bhāvo  
dṛṣṭvā rūpaḿ ghoram īdṛń mamedam  
vyapeta-bhīḥ prīta-manāḥ punas tvaḿ  
tad eva me rūpam idaḿ prapaśya



### Translation:

**You have been perturbed and bewildered by seeing this horrible feature of Mine. Now let it be finished. My devotee, be free again from all disturbances. With a peaceful mind you can now see the form you desire.**

### Purport:

In the beginning of Bhagavad-gita Arjuna was worried about killing Bhishma and Drona, his worshipful grandfather and master. But Krishna said that he need not be afraid of killing his grandfather. When the sons of Dhritarashtra tried to disrobe Draupadi in the assembly of the Kurus, Bhishma and Drona were silent, and for such negligence of duty they should be killed. Krishna showed His universal form to Arjuna just to show him that these people were already killed for their unlawful action. That scene was shown to Arjuna because devotees are always peaceful and they cannot perform such horrible actions. The purpose of the revelation of the universal form was shown; now Arjuna wanted to see the four-armed form, and Krishna showed him. A devotee is not much interested in the universal form, for it does not enable one to reciprocate loving feelings. Either a devotee wants to offer his respectful worshipful feelings, or he wants to see the two-handed Krishna form so that he can reciprocate in loving service with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.