# Text 18

विस्तरेणात्मनो योगं विभूतिं च जनार्दन ।  
भूयः कथय तृप्तिर्हि शृण्वतो नास्ति मेऽमृतम् ॥१८॥

vistareṇātmano yogaḿ  
vibhūtiḿ ca janārdana  
bhūyaḥ kathaya tṛptir hi  
śṛṇvato nāsti me 'mṛtam



### Translation:

**O Janardana, again please describe in detail the mystic power of Your opulences. I am never satiated in hearing about You, for the more I hear the more I want to taste the nectar of Your words.**

### Purport:

A similar statement was made to Suta Gosvami by the rishis of Naimisharanya, headed by Saunaka. That statement is:

vayam tu na vitripyama

uttama-sloka-vikrame

yac chrinvatam rasa-jnanam

svadu svadu pade pade

"One can never be satiated even though one continuously hears the transcendental pastimes of Krishna, who is glorified by excellent prayers. Those who have entered into a transcendental relationship with Krishna relish at every step the descriptions of the pastimes of the Lord." (Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.1.19) Thus Arjuna is interested in hearing about Krishna, and specifically how He remains as the all-pervading Supreme Lord.

Now as far as amritam, nectar, is concerned, any narration or statement concerning Krishna is just like nectar. And this nectar can be perceived by practical experience. Modern stories, fiction and histories are different from the transcendental pastimes of the Lord in that one will tire of hearing mundane stories but one never tires of hearing about Krishna. It is for this reason only that the history of the whole universe is replete with references to the pastimes of the incarnations of Godhead. The Puranas are histories of bygone ages that relate the pastimes of the various incarnations of the Lord. In this way the reading matter remains forever fresh, despite repeated readings.