# Text 32

सर्गाणामादिरन्तश्च मध्यं चैवाहमर्जुन ।  
अध्यात्मविद्या विद्यानां वादः प्रवदतामहम् ॥३२॥

sargāṇām ādir antaś ca  
madhyaḿ caivāham arjuna  
adhyātma-vidyā vidyānāḿ  
vādaḥ pravadatām aham



### Translation:

**Of all creations I am the beginning and the end and also the middle, O Arjuna. Of all sciences I am the spiritual science of the self, and among logicians I am the conclusive truth.**

### Purport:

Among the created manifestations, the first is the creation of the total material elements. As explained before, the cosmic manifestation is created and conducted by Maha-Vishnu, Garbhodakasayi Vishnu and Kshirodakasayi Vishnu, and then again it is annihilated by Lord Siva. Brahma is a secondary creator. All these agents of creation, maintenance and annihilation are incarnations of the material qualities of the Supreme Lord. Therefore He is the beginning, the middle and the end of all creation.

For advanced education there are various kinds of books of knowledge, such as the four Vedas, their six supplements, the Vedanta-sutra, books of logic, books of religiosity and the Puranas. So all together there are fourteen divisions of books of education. Of these, the book which presents adhyatma-vidya, spiritual knowledge -- in particular, the Vedanta-sutra -- represents Krishna.

Among logicians there are different kinds of argument. Supporting one's argument with evidence that also supports the opposing side is called jalpa. Merely trying to defeat one's opponent is called vitanda. But the actual conclusion is called vada. This conclusive truth is a representation of Krishna.