# Text 11

यतन्तो योगिनश्चैनं पश्यन्त्यात्मन्यवस्थितम् ।  
यतन्तोऽप्यकृतात्मानो नैनं पश्यन्त्यचेतसः ॥११॥

yatanto yoginaś cainaḿ  
paśyanty ātmany avasthitam  
yatanto 'py akṛtātmāno  
nainaḿ paśyanty acetasaḥ



### Translation:

**The endeavoring transcendentalists, who are situated in self-realization, can see all this clearly. But those whose minds are not developed and who are not situated in self-realization cannot see what is taking place, though they may try to.**

### Purport:

There are many transcendentalists on the path of spiritual self-realization, but one who is not situated in self-realization cannot see how things are changing in the body of the living entity. The word yoginah is significant in this connection. In the present day there are many so-called yogis, and there are many so-called associations of yogis, but they are actually blind in the matter of self-realization. They are simply addicted to some sort of gymnastic exercise and are satisfied if the body is well built and healthy. They have no other information. They are called yatanto 'py akritatmanah. Even though they are endeavoring in a so-called yoga system, they are not self-realized. Such people cannot understand the process of the transmigration of the soul. Only those who are actually in the yoga system and have realized the self, the world, and the Supreme Lord -- in other words, the bhakti-yogis, those engaged in pure devotional service in Krishna consciousness -- can understand how things are taking place.