# Text 31

सर्वभूतस्थितं यो मां भजत्येकत्वमास्थितः ।  
सर्वथा वर्तमानोऽपि स योगी मयि वर्तते ॥३१॥

sarva-bhūta-sthitaḿ yo māḿ  
bhajaty ekatvam āsthitaḥ  
sarvathā vartamāno 'pi  
sa yogī mayi vartate



### Translation:

**Such a yogi, who engages in the worshipful service of the Supersoul, knowing that I and the Supersoul are one, remains always in Me in all circumstances.**

### Purport:

A yogi who is practicing meditation on the Supersoul sees within himself the plenary portion of Krishna as Vishnu -- with four hands, holding conchshell, wheel, club and lotus flower. The yogi should know that Vishnu is not different from Krishna. Krishna in this form of Supersoul is situated in everyone's heart. Furthermore, there is no difference between the innumerable Supersouls present in the innumerable hearts of living entities. Nor is there a difference between a Krishna conscious person always engaged in the transcendental loving service of Krishna and a perfect yogi engaged in meditation on the Supersoul. The yogi in Krishna consciousness -- even though he may be engaged in various activities while in material existence -- remains always situated in Krishna. This is confirmed in the Bhakti-rasamrita-sindhu (1.2.187) of Srila Rupa Gosvami: nikhilasv apy avasthasu jivan-muktah sa ucyate. A devotee of the Lord, always acting in Krishna consciousness, is automatically liberated. In the Narada-pancaratra this is confirmed in this way:

dik-kalady-anavacchinne

krishne ceto vidhaya ca

tan-mayo bhavati kshipram

jivo brahmani yojayet

"By concentrating one's attention on the transcendental form of Krishna, who is all-pervading and beyond time and space, one becomes absorbed in thinking of Krishna and then attains the happy state of transcendental association with Him."

Krishna consciousness is the highest stage of trance in yoga practice. This very understanding that Krishna is present as Paramatma in everyone's heart makes the yogi faultless. The Vedas (Gopala-tapani Upanishad 1.21) confirm this inconceivable potency of the Lord as follows: eko 'pi san bahudha yo 'vabhati. "Although the Lord is one, He is present in innumerable hearts as many." Similarly, in the smriti-sastra it is said:

eka eva paro vishnuh

sarva-vyapi na samsayah

aisvaryad rupam ekam ca

surya-vat bahudheyate

"Vishnu is one, and yet He is certainly all-pervading. By His inconceivable potency, in spite of His one form, He is present everywhere, as the sun appears in many places at once."