# Text 32

यदृच्छया चोपपन्नं स्वर्गद्वारमपावृतम् ।  
सुखिनः क्षत्रियाः पार्थ लभन्ते युद्धमीदृशम् ॥३२॥

yadṛcchayā copapannaḿ  
svarga-dvāram apāvṛtam  
sukhinaḥ kṣatriyāḥ pārtha  
labhante yuddham īdṛśam



### Translation:

**O Partha, happy are the kshatriyas to whom such fighting opportunities come unsought, opening for them the doors of the heavenly planets.**

### Purport:

As supreme teacher of the world, Lord Krishna condemns the attitude of Arjuna, who said, "I do not find any good in this fighting. It will cause perpetual habitation in hell." Such statements by Arjuna were due to ignorance only. He wanted to become nonviolent in the discharge of his specific duty. For a kshatriya to be on the battlefield and to become nonviolent is the philosophy of fools. In the Parasara-smriti, or religious codes made by Parasara, the great sage and father of Vyasadeva, it is stated:

kshatriyo hi praja rakshan

sastra-panih pradandayan

nirjitya para-sainyadi

kshitim dharmena palayet

"The kshatriya's duty is to protect the citizens from all kinds of difficulties, and for that reason he has to apply violence in suitable cases for law and order. Therefore he has to conquer the soldiers of inimical kings, and thus, with religious principles, he should rule over the world."

Considering all aspects, Arjuna had no reason to refrain from fighting. If he should conquer his enemies, he would enjoy the kingdom; and if he should die in the battle, he would be elevated to the heavenly planets, whose doors were wide open to him. Fighting would be for his benefit in either case.